## Base64 Encoding & Decoding

The **base64 command** encodes binary strings into text representations using the **base64** encoding format.

**Syntax**:

	- `base64 [OPTION] [INFILE] [OUTFILE]`

**Useful Options**:

- `-e / --encode`
  - This option is used to encode any data from standard input or from any file. It is the default option.
- `-d / --decode`
  - This option is used to decode any encoded data from standard input or from any file.
- `-i / --ignore-garbage`
  - This option is used to ignore non-alphabet character while decoding.



### What is Base64 Encoding?

Base64 is an encoding process for converting binary data into an ASCII string format by converting that binary data into a 6-bit character representation. Base64 is useful for preparing raw data to be transmitted to a plain-text system by converting that raw data into a uniform shape that will not cause interpretation issues from characters that may be used for special functions. You do not want a protocol interpreting your binary data as a control character and causing unwanted behavior.

### Encoding Textual Data

You can use `base64` to encode text data on the command line by simply invoking the command without any options, though you can specify `-e` or `--encode` to perform the same task:

```
eris@fnord:~$ echo "This data will be encoded as base64..." | base64
VGhpcyBkYXRhIHdpbGwgYmUgZW5jb2RlZCBhcyBiYXNlNjQuLi4K
```

After executing this command the encoded string is passed to the terminal through `STDOUT`.

### Decoding Textual Data

Using `base64` we can decode the string we just received as output from and see the original message:

```
eris@fnord:~$ echo "VGhpcyBkYXRhIHdpbGwgYmUgZW5jb2RlZCBhcyBiYXNlNjQuLi4K" | base64 --decode
This data will be encoded as base64...

```

### Working with Files

You can also specify input files that `base64` will then either `--encode` or `--decode` based on your desired outcome:

```
eris@fnord:~$ echo "This data will be encoded in a text file." | base64 > encodedData
eris@fnord:~$ cat encodedData 
VGhpcyBkYXRhIHdpbGwgYmUgZW5jb2RlZCBpbiBhIHRleHQgZmlsZS4K
eris@fnord:~$ base64 encodedData --decode
This data will be encoded in a text file.

<--also-->

eris@fnord:~$ echo "This is a text file" > justaTextFile.txt
eris@fnord:~$ cat justaTextFile.txt 
This is a text file
eris@fnord:~$ base64 justaTextFile.txt > justaTextFile.txt.encoded
eris@fnord:~$ cat justaTextFile.txt.encoded 
VGhpcyBpcyBhIHRleHQgZmlsZQo=
eris@fnord:~$ base64 justaTextFile.txt.encoded --decode > justaTextFile.txt.decoded
eris@fnord:~$ cat justaTextFile.txt.decoded 
This is a text file
```

In the examples above I used piping and redirection to output the encoded data into a file and then used `base64` to decode the files and output the decoded string into a new file.
